# &beta;


## To-do for version 2

### Features to implement

1. Include plotting motifs around TSSs on both strands separately to check if a pyrimidine-purine (initiator-like) motif is present on both strands. This lets a user check if TSSs are shifted (are not a pyrimidine-purine pair) and/or initiator motifs are different on the two strands (neither should happen).

2. Track generation for the genome browser (normalized counts).

3. Investigate and ideally resolve the issue with `CAGEr` using only one thread when reading samples and working within the pipeline. Get in touch with Charles Plessy after a reasonable investigation. (Damir discovered that CAGEr uses the number of thread equal to the number of read input files, independently of the number of threads set to it; but it is still unclear why CAGEr uses only one thread for multiple input samples when run within the pipeline.)

### Finishing up

4. **[in progress]** Make a "metromap" schematic of the pipeline. See, for example, the metromap for [nf-core/cutandrun](https://nf-co.re/cutandrun/3.2.1).

5. Cite in `CITATIONS.md` all the tools that we used.

6. Make it possible to run the pipeline by providing the GitHub repository name (and, possibly, a version name / commit hash), instead of making the user clone the repository first.



- [ReadMe](docs/README.md)
  - The actual documentation






The pipeline will produce a directory with results (by default, called `results`) and a directory for intermediate files (by default, called `work`) in the directory where it is launched. If running the pipeline sequentially on different raw datasets (for example, on data from different species), make sure to launch each run from a different directory, so that the next run does not overwrite the results of the previous run. However, if you plan to run two or more instances of the pipeline in parallel, using the same storage, then, apart from running them from different directories, you also must provide a different name for each work directory using the `-w` option. 

Since Nextflow work directories can quickly become very large and do not need to be backed-up (but removed after a successful run, instead!), a good practice is to create work directories in a dedicated storage space that gets cleaned once in a while and is usually called a "scratch" space. Make sure to check the documentation of your cluster/server or to ask your system administrator on where you should create Nextflow work directories.

### Examples

#### Paired-end reads with locally stored STAR index and BSgenome

Call TSSs from the test yeast paired-end CAGE reads using the locally stored test STAR index and the `BSgenome.Scerevisiae.UCSC.sacCer3` R package. The package will be automatically downloaded and installed within the CAGEr container on the fly and will be used there with CAGEr. To run this example, the user needs to provide full paths to the test FASTQ files in `samplesheet_sacer_pe_template.csv` and the path to a "scratch" (or any other convenient) storage space for the Nextflow work directory:

```bash
nextflow run customcageq/main.nf \
    --bsgenome BSgenome.Scerevisiae.UCSC.sacCer3 \
    --gtf customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.ensGene.gtf \
    --index customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3_star_index/ \
    --samplesheet customcageq/assets/samplesheet_sacer_pe_template.csv \
    -profile singularity \
    -w /path/to/scratch/work
```

This example represents a typical use case for processing CAGE data from an organism with an available, locally stored, STAR genome index and a corresponding BSgenome package available in Bioconductor. For example, this is a use case for human CAGE data processing with the hg38 or T2T-CHM13 assembly. Instead of the `singularity` profile, one may use their institution's Nextflow profile (see [publicly available institutional Nextflow profiles](https://nf-co.re/configs)).

#### Single-end reads with locally stored FASTA and GTF files

Call TSSs from the test yeast single-end CAGE reads (stored in per-sample subdirectories of an input directory) using locally stored FASTA and GTF files (and an optional file with splice junctions) for `STAR` index generation on the fly, as well as a locally stored seed file and a source directory to build a BSgenome R package. The package will be automatically installed within the CAGEr container from the autogenerated `.tar.gz` archive and used with CAGEr. To run this example, the user needs to provide full paths to the test FASTQ files in `samplesheet_sacer_se_template.csv`, as well as paths to a locally stored seed file and a source directory:

```bash
nextflow run customcageq/main.nf \
    --forgeseed /path/to/bsgenome_forging.seed \
    --sourcedir /path/to/seqs_srcdir \
    --gtf customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.ensGene.gtf \
    --fasta customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.fa \
    --gtf customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.ensGene.gtf \
    --infolder customcageq/assets/sacCer_fastq/pe_per_sample/ \
    -profile singularity
```

where the `pe_per_sample` input directory has the following structure:

```bash
customcageq/assets/sacCer_fastq/pe_per_sample/
├── S10
│   ├── S10_S6_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz
│   └── S10_S6_L001_R2_001.fastq.gz
└── S14
    ├── S14_S8_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz
    ├── S14_S8_L001_R2_001.fastq.gz
    ├── S14_S8_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz
    └── S14_S8_L002_R2_001.fastq.gz
```

This example may suit for the processing of CAGE data from a new species for which the user has to build ("forge") a BSgenome package by themselves. After forging the BSgenome once, the user can copy the resulting `.tar.gz` file from `results/bsgenome` and reuse it in subsequent runs of the pipeline by setting the `--bsgenome` option, for example: `--bsgenome /path/to/bsgenome/BSgenome.Scerevisiae.UCSC.sacCer3_1.4.0.tar.gz`.

#### CAGEscan libraries

Call TSSs from FANTOM5 CAGEscan libraries (see, for example, [CAGEscan datasets from human primary cells by FANTOM5](https://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/datafiles/latest/basic/human.primary_cell.CAGEScan/)). These libraries require trimming of 9 nt from the 5'-ends of the forward reads and of 6 nt from the 5'-ends of the reverse reads and do not seem to require separate G-trimming ([Bertin et al., 2017](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.147)). To run this example, the user needs to generate the `fantom5_cagescan_pe.csv` input table (see above) and provide a path to it and to the `STAR` index of the T2T-CHM13 v2.0 human genome assembly:

```bash
nextflow run customcageq/main.nf \
    --bsgenome BSgenome.Hsapiens.NCBI.T2T.CHM13v2.0 \
    --gtf /path/to/chm13_t2t.gtf \
    --index /path/to/chm13_t2t_v2.0_star_index \
    --params-trimgalore '--clip_R1 9 --clip_R2 6' \
    --nogtrim \
    --samplesheet /path/to/fantom5_cagescan_pe.csv \
    -profile singularity
```

#### **Not recommended.** Paired-end reads with bowtie2 and duplicate removal

Call TSSs from the test yeast paired-end CAGE reads using `bowtie2` for read mapping. Additionally, remove PCR duplicates and optical duplicates at a maximum distance 100 (see [`samtools markdup`](https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-markdup.html)) before doing alignment QC and TSS calling:

```bash
nextflow run customcageq/main.nf \
    --bsgenome BSgenome.Scerevisiae.UCSC.sacCer3 \
    --gtf customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.ensGene.gtf \
    --bowtie2 \
    --index customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3_bowtie2_index \
    --dedup \
    --dist 100 \
    --samplesheet customcageq/assets/samplesheet_sacer_pe_template.csv \
    -profile singularity
```

This example collects options that are **not recommended** but retained just in case. Using `bowtie2` does not allow accounting for splicing and makes CAGEr use BAM files, which slows the creation of the CAGEexp object considerably. Also, read deduplication is not recommended because CAGE reads, by design, come only from transcripts, with one read coming from the 5'-end of the transcript, which increases the probability of true duplicates, in comparison to whole-genome libraries, like ChIP-seq or ATAC-seq. The `--bowtie2` option can also be used with the `--fasta` option to build a `bowtie2` genome index on the fly, while the `--dedup` and `--dist` options can be used with the default `STAR` mapping.

#### Starting from params file

You can add your pipeline parameters to the `params.yaml` file too. The fields that are not needed should remain empty.

```
samplesheet: "customcageq/assets/samplesheet_sacer_pe_template.csv"
infolder:
bsgenome: "BSgenome.Scerevisiae.UCSC.sacCer3"
gtf: "customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3.ensGene.gtf"
forgeseed:
sourcedir:
fasta:
index: "customcageq/assets/sacCer3_genome/sacCer3_star_index/"
```

When running the pipeline you need to define the location of the `params.yaml` file with the flag `-params-file` and add the nextflow parameters as required.

```
nextflow run customcageq/main.nf -params-file customcageseq/params.yaml -profile singularity -w /path/to/scratch/work
```

## Remarks

1. By default, up to 10 different mapping loci are allowed for each read but only uniquely mapping reads are selected to create bigWig files. If you would like to work with multimappers (or change mapping parameters in any other way), please amend STAR mapping options in `conf/modules.config` and/or replace the default `true` value for the `unique_only` pipeline option with `false` (in which case bigWig files will be created using the full set of alignments, not only unique ones). However, if multimapping reads are allowed, then bigWig files will contain non-integer counts for positions where multimappers align. This is due to the fact that STAR splits the count of 1 between all alignments of the same read.

## Credits

**ComputationalRegulatoryGenomicsICL/customcageq** has been developed by Pavel Nikitin ([@nikitin-p](https://github.com/nikitin-p)), Sviatoslav Sidorov ([@sidorov-si](https://github.com/sidorov-si)), Damir Baranasic ([@da-bar](https://github.com/da-bar)), Elena Gómez-Marín ([@ElenaGoMa](https://github.com/ElenaGoMa)), Katalin Ferenc ([@ferenckata](https://github.com/ferenckata)).

## Citations

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add citation for pipeline after first release. Uncomment lines below and update Zenodo doi and badge at the top of this file. -->
<!-- If you use  ComputationalRegulatoryGenomicsICL/customcage for your analysis, please cite it using the following doi: [10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX) -->

This pipeline uses code and infrastructure developed and maintained by the [nf-core](https://nf-co.re) community, reused here under the [MIT license](https://github.com/nf-core/tools/blob/master/LICENSE).

> **The nf-core framework for community-curated bioinformatics pipelines.**
>
> Philip Ewels, Alexander Peltzer, Sven Fillinger, Harshil Patel, Johannes Alneberg, Andreas Wilm, Maxime Ulysse Garcia, Paolo Di Tommaso & Sven Nahnsen.
>
> _Nat Biotechnol._ 2020 Feb 13. doi: [10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x).
